SQA Computing.rb
================

This is a project to rewrite existing teaching materials for the Scottish Qualifications Agency's Computing exams to use Ruby.  The existing materials use VB or Delphi.

Scope
-----

The scope of the project, initially, is to rewrite the bare minimum of material to enable the course to be taught using Ruby as the programming language.  This is absolutely a stop-gap measure as we wait for the next generation of Scottish qualifications to stabilise.

It is outside the scope of this project to rewrite the core content of the materials. The intent is to recreate the programming exercises in Ruby, but not to introduce the more esoteric Ruby-specific language constructs such as blocks. It will, of course, be necessary to refer to basic String and number APIs, such as `String#casecmp`, as replacements for the VB APIs mentioned in the text.

TODO
----

1. Identify the VB-specific areas of each document.  This is more likely to be an issue for the areas of the documents which refer to specific VB IDE infrastructure.
2. Produce a Rubified version of these.
3. Write the content.
4. Have the content reviewed for technical accuracy.

Known Issues
------------

Technical issues with the documents:

* The blockquoted, back-ticked code blocks don't show correct indentation.
* TOCs are out of sync with the documents.
* The structure needs to be tightened (some things should be 4-# headings).

Source Documents
----------------
This project is _not_ affiliated with the Scottish Qualifications Agency in any way.

The base materials for Intermediate 2 are documents produced by Learning and Teaching Scotland which contain the following copyright statement:

>	This publication may be reproduced in whole or in part for
>	educational purposes by educational establishments in Scotland
>	provided that no profit accrues at any stage. 

The base materials for Higher Computing are the SCHOLAR documents, which are covered by the following copyright statement:

>	Members of the SCHOLAR Forum may reproduce this publication in whole
>	or in part for educational purposes within their establishment
>	providing that no profit accrues at any stage.

Repository Organisation
-----------------------

The repository is organised by course:

>  `/higher`  
>  `/intermediate2`

Each course directory has a README, which discusses the specific work required for each course.

Miscellaneous
-------------

* [Markdown Syntax Reference](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/syntax)